He  lived  in reclusion in a deep, murky cave, in the very
heart of a rocky mountain, feeding  only  on  bats,  rats,  and
mold.  Occasionally,  it  is true, stalactite hunters or snoopy
travelers would come peeking into the  cave,  and  that  was  a
tasty   treat.  Other  pleasant  memories  included  a  brigand
attempting to flee from justice, and two dogs  that  were  once
let  loose to ascertain if the passage did not go clear through
the mountain. The surrounding country was wild, porous snow lay
here and there on the rock, and waterfalls rumbled with an  icy
roar.  He  had  hatched  some  thousand years ago, and, perhaps
because it had happened rather unexpectedly--the  enormous  egg
was  cracked  open  by  a  lightning bolt one stormy night--the
dragon had turned out cowardly and not overly bright.  Besides,
he  was  strongly affected by his mother's death. . . . She had
long terrorized the neighboring villages, had spat flames,  and
the  king  would  get  cross,  and  around her lair incessantly
prowled knights, whom she would crunch to pieces like  walnuts.
But  once,  when she had swallowed a plump royal chef and dozed
off on a sun-warmed rock, the great Ganon himself  galloped  up
in  iron armor, on a black steed under silver netting. The poor
sleepy thing went rearing up, her green and red humps  flashing
like  bonfires,  and the charging knight thrust his swift lance
into her smooth white breast. She crashed to  the  ground,  and
promptly, out of the pink wound, sidled the corpulent chef with
her enormous, steaming heart under his arm.
     The  young  dragon saw all this from a hiding place behind
the rock and, forever after,  could  not  think  about  knights
without  a  shudder.  He  withdrew  into  the depths of a cave,
whence he never emerged. Thus passed ten centuries,  equivalent
to twenty dragon years.
     Then, suddenly, he fell prey to unbearable melancholy. . .
. In fact,  the  spoiled  food  from  the  cave  was  provoking
ferocious gastric alarms, revolting  rumblings,  and  pain.  He
spent  nine years making up his mind, and on the tenth, he did.
Slowly and cautiously, gathering in and extending the rings  of
his tail, he clambered out of his cave.
     Immediately he sensed that it was spring. The black rocks,
washed by a recent downpour, were ashimmer; the sunlight boiled
in the  overflowing  mountain  torrent; the air was redolent of
wild game.  And  the  dragon,  broadly  inflating  his  flaming
nostrils,  started  his  descent  into  the  valley. His satiny
belly, white as  a  water  lily,  nearly  touched  the  ground,
crimson blotches stood out on his bloated green flanks, and the
sturdy scales merged, on his back, into a jagged conflagration,
a  ridge  of double ruddy humps, diminishing in size toward the
potently, flexibly twitching tail.  His  head  was  smooth  and
greenish,  bubbles  of  fiery  mucus  hung from his soft, warty
underlip,  and  his  giant,  scaly  paws  left   deep   tracks,
star-shaped concavities.
     The first thing he saw upon descending into the valley was
a railroad  train  traveling  along  rocky slopes. The dragon's
first reaction was delight, since he mistook the  train  for  a
relative  he could play with. Moreover, he thought that beneath
that shiny, hard-looking shell there must surely be some tender
meat. So he set off  in  pursuit,  his  feet  slapping  with  a
hollow,  damp noise, but, just as he was about to gobble up the
last car, the train sped into a  tunnel.  The  dragon  stopped,
thrust  his  head into the black lair into which his quarry had
vanished, but there was no  way  he  could  get  in  there.  He
dispatched  a  couple  of  torrid sneezes into the depths, then
retracted his head, sat on his haunches, and began waiting--who
knows, it might come running out again. After waiting some time
he shook his head and moved on. At that  instant  a  train  did
come scurrying out of the dark lair, gave a sly flash of window
glass,  and  disappeared behind a curve. The dragon gave a hurt
look over his shoulder and, raising  his  tail  like  a  plume,
resumed his journey.
     Dusk  was  falling.  Fog  floated  above  the meadows. The
gigantic beast, big as  a  live  mountain,  was  seen  by  some
homeward-bound  peasants,  who  remained  petrified with awe. A
little auto speeding along the highway  had  all  four  of  its
tires blow out from fright, bounced, and ended up in the ditch.
But  the dragon walked on, noticing nothing; from afar came the
hot scent of concentrated crowds of humans, and that  is  where
he  was headed. And, against the blue expanse of the night sky,
there loomed before him black factory smokestacks, guardians of
a large industrial town.
     The main personages of this town were two:  the  owner  of
the  Miracle Tobacco Company and that of the Big Helmet Tobacco
Company. Between them raged age-old, subtle hostilities,  about
which  one could write an entire epic poem. They were rivals in
everything--the motley colors of  their  advertisements,  their
distribution  techniques,  pricing, and labor relations--but no
one could say which had the upper hand. That  memorable  night,
the  owner  of  the  Miracle  Company  stayed  very late at his
office. Nearby on his desk lay a stack of new, freshly  printed
advertisements  that  workmen  from  the  cooperative  were  to
plaster around the city at daybreak.
     Suddenly a bell pierced the silence of the  night  and,  a
few   moments  later,  entered  a  pale,  haggard  man  with  a
burdocklike wart on his right cheek.  The  factory  owner  knew
him:  he  was  the  proprietor  of  a  model tavern the Miracle
Company had set up on the outskirts.
     "It's going on two in the morning,  my  friend.  The  only
justification  I  can  find  for  your  visit  is  an  event of
unheard-of importance."
     "That's exactly the case," said the  tavern  keeper  in  a
calm  voice,  although  his wart was twitching. This is what he
reported:
     He was bundling off five thoroughly soused  old  laborers.
They must have seen something highly curious outdoors, for they
all  broke out laughing--"Oh-ho-ho," rumbled one of the voices,
"I must have had one glass too many, if I see, big as life, the
hydra of counterrevo--"
     He did not have time to finish, for there was a  surge  of
terrifying,  ponderous  noise, and someone screamed. The tavern
keeper stepped outside to have a look. A monster, glimmering in
the murk like a moist mountain, was swallowing something  large
with  its  head  thrown back, which made its whitish neck swell
with alternating hillocks; it swallowed and licked  its  chops,
its  whole body rocked, and it gently lay down in the middle of
the street.
     "I think it must have  dozed  off,"  finished  the  tavern
keeper, restraining the twitching wart with his finger.
     The factory owner got up. The robust fillings of his teeth
flashed  with  the golden fire of inspiration. The arrival of a
live  dragon  aroused  in  him  no  other  feelings  than   the
passionate desire that guided him in every instance--the desire
to inflict a defeat on the rival firm.
     "Eureka,"  he  exclaimed.  "Listen, my good man, are there
any other witnesses?"
     "I don't think so," the other replied. "Everybody  was  in
bed, and I decided not to wake anyone and came straight to you.
So as to avoid panic."

     The factory owner donned his hat.

     "Splendid.  Take  this--no,  not the whole pile, thirty or
forty sheets will do--and bring along this can, and  the  brush
too. There, now show me the way."
     They  went  out  into  the dark night and were soon at the
quiet street at the end  of  which,  according  to  the  tavern
keeper,  reposed  a  monster.  First,  by  the light of a lone,
yellow streetlamp, they saw a policeman standing on his head in
the middle of the pavement. It turned  out  later  that,  while
making  his nightly rounds, he had come upon the dragon and had
such a fright that he turned upside down and remained petrified
in that attitude. The factory owner, a man with  the  size  and
strength  of a gorilla, turned him right side up and leaned him
against the lightpost;  then  he  approached  the  dragon.  The
dragon  was  asleep,  and  no  wonder.  The  individuals he had
devoured, it so happened, were totally impregnated  with  wine,
and  had popped succulently between his jaws. The alcohol on an
empty stomach had gone straight to his head and he had  lowered
the  pellicles  of his eyelids with a blissful smile. He lay on
his belly with his front paws folded under, and the glow of the
streetlamp  highlighted  the  glistening  arcs  of  the  double
vertebral protuberances.
     "Set  up  the  ladder, '" said the factory owner. "I'll do
the pasting myself."
     And, choosing flat spots on the slimy green flanks of  the
monster,  he began unhurriedly brushing paste on the scaly skin
and affixing ample advertising posters. When he  had  used  all
the  sheets,  he  gave  the  brave  tavern  keeper a meaningful
handshake and, chomping on his cigar, returned home.
     Morning came, a magnificent spring morning softened  by  a
lilac  haze.  And  suddenly the street came alive with a merry,
excited din, doors and windows slammed, people poured into  the
street,  mingling  with  those  who  were  hurrying  somewhere,
laughing as they went. What they saw was a  perfectly  lifelike
dragon,  all  covered  with  colorful  advertisements, slapping
listlessly along the asphalt. One poster was even stuck to  the
bald  crown  of his head. "smoke only miracle brand," rollicked
the blue and crimson letters of  the  ads.  "only  fools  DON'T
SMOKE  MY  CIGARETTES," "MIRACLE TOBACCO TURNS AIR INTO HONEY,"
"MIRACLE, MIRACLE, MIRACLE'."
     It really is a miracle, laughed the crowd, and how  is  it
done--is it a machine or are there people inside?
     The dragon was feeling rotten after his involuntary binge.
The cheap wine now made him sick to his stomach, his whole body
felt weak,  and  the  thought  of  breakfast  was  out  of  the
question. Besides, he was now overcome by  an  acute  sense  of
shame, the excruciating shyness of a creature that finds itself
amid a crowd for the first time. Frankly speaking, he very much
wished  to  return  as  soon  as possible to his cave, but that
would have been even more shameful--therefore, he continued his
grim progress through the town. Several men  with  placards  on
their backs protected him from the curious and from urchins who
wanted  to  slip  under his white belly, clamber onto his lofty
backbone, or touch his snout. Music played, people  gaped  from
every  window, behind the dragon automobiles drove single file,
and in one of them slouched the factory owner, the hero of  the
day.
     The  dragon walked without looking at anybody, dismayed by
the incomprehensible merriment that he aroused.
     Meanwhile, in a sunlit office,  along  a  carpet  soft  as
moss,   paced   to  and  fro  with  clenched  fists  the  rival
manufacturer, owner of the  Big  Helmet  Company.  At  an  open
window,  observing  the  procession,  stood  his  girlfriend, a
diminutive tightrope dancer.
     "This  is  an  outrage,"  croaked  over  and   again   the
manufacturer,  a  middle-aged,  bald man with blue-gray bags of
flabby skin under his eyes. "The police ought to put a stop  to
this  scandal. . . . When did he manage to cobble together this
stuffed dummy?"
     "Ralph," the dancer suddenly cried, clapping her hands. "I
know what you should do. We have a number at the circus  called
The Joust, and--"
     In a torrid whisper, goggling her doll-like, mascara-lined
eyes,  she  told  him  her  plan.  The  manufacturer beamed. An
instant later he was already  on  the  phone  with  the  circus
manager,
     "So,"  said  the  manufacturer,  hanging up. "The dummy is
made of inflated rubber. We'll see what's left of it if we give
it a good prick."
     Meanwhile the dragon had crossed the  bridge,  passed  the
marketplace and the Gothic cathedral, which aroused some pretty
repugnant memories, continued along the main boulevard, and was
traversing  a  broad  square  when, parting the crowd, a knight
unexpectedly came charging at him. The knight wore iron  armor,
visor  lowered,  a  funereal  plume  on  his helmet, and rode a
ponderous black horse in silvery netting.  Arms  bearers--women
dressed   as  pages--walked  alongside,  carrying  picturesque,
hastily devised banners heralding "big helmet," "SMOKE ONLY BIG
HELMET,"  "BIG  HELMET  BEATS  THEM  ALL."  The  circus   rider
impersonating  the  knight  spurred  his steed and clenched his
lance. But the steed for some reason started backing,  spurting
foam,  then suddenly reared up and sat heavily on its haunches.
The knight tumbled to the asphalt,  with  such  a  clatter  one
might  think  someone had thrown all the dishes out the window.
But the dragon did not see this. At the knight's first move  he
had stopped abruptly, then rapidly turned, knocking down a pair
of  curious old women standing on a balcony with his tail as he
did so, and, squashing the  scattering  spectators,  had  taken
flight.  He  was out of the town in a single bound, flew across
the fields, scrambled up the rocky slopes, and  dove  into  his
bottomless  cavern.  There  he  collapsed  onto  his back, paws
folded and showing his satiny, white, shuddering belly  to  the
dark  vaults, heaved a deep breath, closed his astonished eyes,
and died. 
